src/1.md, before:

# Part 1: Hello, Ferris!

## Installing Rust ([1.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-01-installation.html))

We have a few bits we'll need

- [`rustup`](https://rustup.rs/) for managing versions of Rust and the other tools below
- [`cargo`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/) Rust's build tool and package manager. 99% of Rust projects use cargo.
- [`rustc`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/what-is-rustc.html) the Rust compiler itself
- [`rust-analyzer`](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/) the Rust language server

This is made easy with `rustup`, which can be installed by running the command below. If you're on a system other than DCS, go to <https://rustup.rs> for installation instructions.

```bash
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

Follow the on-screen instructions, and this will install Rust's default stable toolchain to `$HOME/.cargo`.

You'll need to install `rust-analyzer` separately. If you're using [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), the command

```bash
code --install-extension rust-lang.rust-analyzer
```

will install `rust-analyzer` for you. See [the `rust-analyzer` user manual](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/manual.html) for instructions for other editors.

## Hello World ([1.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-02-hello-world.html) & [1.3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-03-hello-cargo.html))

Before we write any code, we need a new Cargo project, or "crate".

```bash
cargo new hello_world
```

Open your new Cargo project, and in the `hello_world` folder, you should see:

- `Cargo.toml`, Cargo's config file, in [TOML](https://toml.io/en/) (Tom’s Obvious, Minimal Language) format.
- `src/main.rs`
  - The `src` directory is where all source code should live
  - `main.rs` is the top-level source file in the crate. It's where the `main()` function should live.
- A `.git` folder - Cargo automatically `init`s a git repo for you.
  - It also adds a default `.gitignore`

Cargo has multiple commands that facilitate the building and running of Rust projects

- `cargo run` will build and run your code, using `main::main` as the entry point
- `cargo build` will just compile the crate
- `cargo check` will check your crate for errors
- `cargo fmt` will format your code using [rustfmt](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustfmt)
- `cargo clippy` will lint your code using [clippy](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy)

See [The Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-03-hello-cargo.html), and also [The Cargo Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/index.html), for more info about Cargo and the `Cargo.toml` file.

Open `main.rs` in VS Code and, oh look, you don't even need to write hello world: Cargo did it for you. You can delete it and write it out again, if you really want.

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    println!("hello world");
}
```

- The `fn` keyword is used to declare functions
- `main` is the name of the function
- Parentheses `()` is where the parameter list goes, and braces `{}` are used to declare blocks
- The `println!()` macro is used for command line output (more on macros/functions later)

## Variables ([3.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-00-common-programming-concepts.html))

Variables in Rust are declared, or _bound_, using the `let` keyword:

```rust
let x = 6;
println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
```

Variables are **immutable by default**, meaning their value _cannot be changed_ once they have been bound. This is _A Good Thing™_ because immutability means less potential for errors. Prefer to leave variables as immutable, unless you absolutely have to, in which case mutable variables can be declared `mut`:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
}
```

We'll talk about type annotations and inference later.

## Types

### Basic Types ([3.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-02-data-types.html))

Rust has the following numeric types:

| Bit Width            | Signed  | Unsigned |
| -------------------- | ------- | -------- |
| 8                    | `i8`    | `u8`     |
| 16                   | `i16`   | `u16`    |
| 32                   | `i32`   | `u32`    |
| 64                   | `i64`   | `u64`    |
| 128                  | `i128`  | `u128`   |
| architecture-defined | `isize` | `usize`  |

(`usize/isize` are the pointer width of the architecture you're compiling for. You should use them for anything representing size/length/indices of data structures, such as arrays.)

We also have floats, `f32` and `f64` which are IEEE754 floating point types (equivalent to `float` and `double` in many languages).

Booleans are of type `bool` and are either `true` or `false`.

Characters are of type `char` and are written using single quotes:

```rust
let c = 'c';
let z = 'Z';
let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
```

`char`s in Rust are four bytes in size, as a char is meant to represent a single Unicode scalar value, meaning it can do much more than just ASCII.

### Primitive Compound Types ([3.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-02-data-types.html))

Rust has tuples, which are used extensively. Tuples can be non-homogenous and of any length.

```rust
let tup = (1, 2);
let trip: (char, i32, f64) = ('A', -2, 100.01);
```

Tuples are accessed using dot syntax, or destructured by pattern matching (more on this later):

```rust
# let tup = (1, 2);
# let trip: (char, i32, f64) = ('A', -2, 100.01);
let one = tup.0 + tup.1 + trip.1;
let (x, y) = tup;
let (c, i, _) = trip;
```

Note the `_` binding, which is used in pattern matching to discard a value:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let _ = 1;
    print!("Can you use _? {}", _);
}
```

Arrays in Rust have a fixed length and are allocated on the stack. They are indexed using brackets `[]`, and have a type signature `[type; length]`. The length of an array is part of it's type in Rust.

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2 ,3];
    let first = a[0];
    let second = a[1];

    let b: [f32; 2] = [-2.0, 4.1];

    // you can also use shorthand for creating arrays of the same element!
    let zeroes = [0; 10]; // ten zeroes!
}
```

Attempting to index out of bounds will cause a **panic**. Panics are Rust's way of throwing unrecoverable errors at runtime, similar to exceptions in other languages. More on those later.

### Type Annotations

`let` bindings can be annotated with their types using the following syntax:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let a: u16 = 4;
    let b: i32 = -1;
    let c: char = 'c';
    let d: &str = "hello!";     // More on string types shortly
    let e: (i32, f32) = (12, 12.0);
    let f: [u32; 3] = [1, 2, 3];
}
```

This is rarely necessary, as Rust can infer types most of the time. You can also annotate numeric literals with their types:

```rust
let a = 4_u16;
let b = -1_i32;
let c = 3.14_f64;
```

### Composite Data Types

We can use these basic types to build more complex types. Rust has two ways of doing this.

#### Structures ([5](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch05-00-structs.html))

Those of you familiar with C will be familiar with `struct`s. Structs are types made up of several fields, where each field has a name and type.

- Structs can be created by giving values to the types, using the syntax shown.
- Fields can be accessed or updated using dot notation.
- If a struct is bound as immutable, its fields are also immutable.

```rust, editable
struct Student {
    name: String,
    id: String,
    year: u32,
    active: bool,
}

fn main() {
    let mut you = Student {
        name: String::from("Your Name"),
        id: String::from("1234567"),
        year: 2,
        active: false,
    };
    println!("My student ID is: {}", you.id);
    you.year += 1;
    println!("My year of study is: {}", you.year);
}
```

#### Enums ([6.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch06-01-defining-an-enum.html))

Enums restrict variables to a predefined finite set of named discrete values. It's short for enumeration, because it is enumerates of all the allowed options. Many languages have support for enums (e.g. C, Java, Haskell), but Rust's enums are most similar to Java's enums or sum types in functional languages such has Haskell and F#.

Say we want to represent some colours. We have a Thing, and we need it to be either red, green, or blue:

```rust, editable
enum Colour {
    Red,
    Green,
    Blue,
}

fn main() {
    let thing_colour: Colour = Colour::Red;
}
```

We now have a new type, `Colour`, and three new values: `Colour::Red`, `Colour::Blue`, and `Colour::Green`.

What makes enums really special is that variants can contain values:

```rust
enum MyEnum {
    NoValue,
    ANumber(u32),
    TwoNumbers(u32, i64),
    AString(String),
}
```

This is a really powerful feature, especially when used in combination with pattern matching, and part of what makes Rust's type system so good.

An example, using an enum to represent some shapes:

```rust, editable
enum Shape {
    Circle(u64),
    Rectangle(u64, u64),
    Triangle(u64, u64, u64),
}

fn main() {
    let circle = Shape::Circle(6);
    let triangle = Shape::Triangle(1, 2, 3);
}
```

Or a recursive definition of a binary tree[^treenote]:

```rust
enum Tree {
    Leaf(i32),
    Branch(Box<Tree>, Box<Tree>),
}
```

#### `Option<T>`

A commonly used enum is `Option<T>`. Option is used to represent values that may or may not exist. Rust has no notion of `null` (no more `NullPointerException`s!), instead preferring to wrap other types in an `Option` when some similar notion of null is needed. This has advantages, as it forces you to explicitly deal with error cases, among other things.

`T` is a generic type parameter, which we'll cover in more detail later.

```rust
enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None,
}
```

Think of it as a type-safe container which may or may not be empty. This enum is frequently used as a return type in methods that may fail:

```rust, editable
fn div(x: i64, y: i64) -> Option<i64> {
    if y == 0 {
        None
    } else {
        Some(x/y)
    }
}

fn main() {
    println!("{:?}", div(15, 3));
}
```

This particular enum is very important as it's used widely throughout the language, and we'll get to it in more detail later.

[^treenote]: The actual use of the tree here is more complex, `Box`es are smart pointers with heap allocation (for unknown size data). More in the [Raytracer Project](raytracer.md#task-54), so don't worry about these for now.


## Functions ([3.3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-03-how-functions-work.html))

Functions in Rust are declared using the `fn` keyword.

- The list of parameters is declared between the parentheses: `name: type`
- The return type is given using an arrow `-> type`
  - Functions with no return type implicitly return `()`, [the unit type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.unit.html).

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    println!("this function has no parameters and no return type");
}

fn inc(x: i32) -> i32 {
    println!("this function returns its parameter plus one");
    return x+1;
}

fn mul(a: f64, b: f64) -> f64 {
    println!("this function returns the product of its parameters");
    a*b
}

fn zip(fst: i32, snd: i32) -> (i32, i32) {
    (fst, snd)
}
```

Note how in the last examples the `return` keyword was not used and there is no semicolon. This is because in Rust, (almost) everything is an expression that returns a value, even blocks. The value of the last expression in a block is the return value of the block. Ending an expression with a semicolon discards the return value. This can be a tricky concept to grasp, see [Rust by Example](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/expression.html) for more detail.

## Control Flow ([3.5](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-05-control-flow.html))

### `if` Expressions

You all hopefully know how these work. The syntax is shown below. In Rust, you don't need parentheses around the condition.

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let number = 6;

    if number % 4 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 4");
    } else if number % 3 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 3");
    } else if number % 2 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 2");
    } else {
        println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
    }
}
```

Boolean expressions are combined with

- `&&` and
- `||` or
- `!` not
- `&&` and `||` are [lazily evaluated](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html#lazy-boolean-operators)

`if` expressions return a value too, so it can be used as a ternary conditional operator:

```rust
let condition = true;
let x = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };
```

### `loop` Loops

`loop` expressions repeat ad infinitum.

```rust, noplayground
loop {
    println!("again!");
}
```

You can `break` out of one, if needs be. This is preferred to `while true`. You can also use one to construct a do-while:

```rust, noplayground
loop {
    do_thing();
    if !condition {
        break;
    }
}
```

### `while` Loops

Pretty standard stuff too:

```rust
let mut number = 3;

while number != 0 {
    println!("{}", number);

    number -= 1;
}
```

### `for` Loops

`for` loops are more like Python's, or Java's range-based for loop, than C/C++. They are used to iterate over a collection, using an _iterator_ (more on those later).

```rust
let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

for element in a {
    println!("the value is: {}", element);
}
```

If you want to loop over a numerical range, you can create a range iterator. Like Python's range, this is exclusive of the last number:

```rust
for number in 1..10 {
    println!("{}", number);
}

for number in (1..10).rev() {
    // this loop goes from 10 -> 1
    println!("{}", number);
}
```

## Strings

Strings in Rust are [not so simple](https://dev-to-uploads.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/articles/kqolzk0s0umg647d7ogg.jpeg). For now, we will consider only `String`. `String` represents a mutable, variable length buffer which can hold your `char`s. Create an empty one with `String::new()`, or create one from a literal using [`String::from()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/string/struct.String.html#method.from-3), [`.to_owned()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.to_owned) or [the trait `into`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.Into.html).

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let empty_string = String::new();
    let hello_world = String::from("Hello, World!");
    let hello_ferris: &str = "Hello, Ferris";
    let owned_ferris = hello_ferris.to_owned();
}
```

The `::` symbol is used to access associated functions which belong to a type. The `from()` and `new()` functions both belong to `String`, so we call them as shown. Think of them as static methods, for those of you into your Java.

## Pattern Matching ([6.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch06-02-match.html))

Those of you familiar with functional languages will be pleased to hear that Rust can do this. Those of you not lucky enough to be familiar with functional languages will likely be a bit confused. Think of it as a fancy switch statement for now. Here's an example, using our `Colour` enum from earlier:

```rust, editable
enum Colour {
    Red, Blue, Green, White, Black
}
fn colour_to_rgb(colour: Colour) -> (u8, u8, u8) {
    match colour {
        Colour::Red => (255, 0, 0),
        Colour::Green => (0, 255, 0),
        Colour::Blue => (0, 0, 255),
        Colour::White => (255, 255, 255),
        Colour::Black => (0, 0, 0),
    }
}

fn main() {
    colour_to_rgb(Colour::Blue);
}
```

The cases come before the `=>`, and the return value for that **match arm** comes after it. The match returns one of those tuples, and then the function returns the return value of the `match`. Remember that we don't need a `return`

However, matching is much more powerful than this. We can include arbitrary expressions after the match arm:

```rust, editable
# enum Colour {
#     Red, Blue, Green, White, Black
# }
fn colour_to_rgb(colour: Colour) -> (u8, u8, u8) {
    match colour {
        Colour::Red => (255, 0, 0),
        Colour::Green => (0, 255, 0),
        Colour::Blue => {
            println!("I'm blue, da ba dee da ba di");
            (0, 0, 255)
        },
        Colour::White => if 10 % 2 == 0 {
            (255, 255, 255)
        } else {
            unreachable!("Something is very wrong");
        },
        Colour::Black => (0, 0, 0),
    }
}

fn main() {
    let rgb = colour_to_rgb(Colour::Blue);
    println!("{:?}", rgb);
}
```

We can also use it to destructure (unpack) and bind values, for use in the `match` body. For example, with `Option<T>`:

```rust, editable
fn maybe_increment(x: Option<i64>) -> Option<i64> {
    match x {
        None => None,
        Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
    }
}
fn main() {
    let five = Some(5);
    let six = maybe_increment(five);
    let none = maybe_increment(None);
}
```

Note that matches must be exhaustive. For example, if you're matching on a `u8`, you must cover all cases from 0 to 255. This is impractical, so the placeholder `_` can be used, as a default case:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let val: u8 = 40;
    match val {
        12 => println!("val is 12"),
        21 => println!("val is 21"),
        _ => println!("val is some other number that we don't care about"),
    }
}
```

Pattern matching can also make use of further conditions (called _guards_). These require a fallback case to act as an else, even if it is only a `_`. There are other places pattern matching can be used, such as in [`if let`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/flow_control/if_let.html) and [`while let`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/flow_control/while_let.html) expressions.

```rust, editable
fn maybe_collatz(x: Option<u64>) -> Option<u64> {
    match x {
        None => None,
        Some(1) => None,
        Some(i) if i % 2 == 0 => Some(i / 2),
        Some(i) => Some(3 * i + 1)
    }
}
fn main() {
    let mut number = Some(7_u64);
    while let Some(i) = number {
        println!("{i}");
        number = maybe_collatz(number);
    }
}
```

Commit message:

Added note about changing install directory

src/1.md, after:

# Part 1: Hello, Ferris!

## Installing Rust ([1.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-01-installation.html))

We have a few bits we'll need

- [`rustup`](https://rustup.rs/) for managing versions of Rust and the other tools below
- [`cargo`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/) Rust's build tool and package manager. 99% of Rust projects use cargo.
- [`rustc`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/what-is-rustc.html) the Rust compiler itself
- [`rust-analyzer`](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/) the Rust language server

This is made easy with `rustup`, which can be installed by running the command below. If you're on a system other than DCS, go to <https://rustup.rs> for installation instructions.

```bash
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
```

Follow the on-screen instructions, and this will install Rust's default stable toolchain to `$HOME/.cargo`. `cargo` can use a large amount of space, so if you are concerned about filling up your home directory (e.g. filling your disk quota), you can set `RUSTUP_HOME` and `CARGO_HOME` to somewhere else, e.g. `/var/tmp/rustup` (this will not persist, but it won't fill your quota).

You'll need to install `rust-analyzer` separately. If you're using [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), the command

```bash
code --install-extension rust-lang.rust-analyzer
```

will install `rust-analyzer` for you. See [the `rust-analyzer` user manual](https://rust-analyzer.github.io/manual.html) for instructions for other editors.

## Hello World ([1.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-02-hello-world.html) & [1.3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-03-hello-cargo.html))

Before we write any code, we need a new Cargo project, or "crate".

```bash
cargo new hello_world
```

Open your new Cargo project, and in the `hello_world` folder, you should see:

- `Cargo.toml`, Cargo's config file, in [TOML](https://toml.io/en/) (Tom’s Obvious, Minimal Language) format.
- `src/main.rs`
  - The `src` directory is where all source code should live
  - `main.rs` is the top-level source file in the crate. It's where the `main()` function should live.
- A `.git` folder - Cargo automatically `init`s a git repo for you.
  - It also adds a default `.gitignore`

Cargo has multiple commands that facilitate the building and running of Rust projects

- `cargo run` will build and run your code, using `main::main` as the entry point
- `cargo build` will just compile the crate
- `cargo check` will check your crate for errors
- `cargo fmt` will format your code using [rustfmt](https://github.com/rust-lang/rustfmt)
- `cargo clippy` will lint your code using [clippy](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust-clippy)

See [The Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch01-03-hello-cargo.html), and also [The Cargo Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/index.html), for more info about Cargo and the `Cargo.toml` file.

Open `main.rs` in VS Code and, oh look, you don't even need to write hello world: Cargo did it for you. You can delete it and write it out again, if you really want.

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    println!("hello world");
}
```

- The `fn` keyword is used to declare functions
- `main` is the name of the function
- Parentheses `()` is where the parameter list goes, and braces `{}` are used to declare blocks
- The `println!()` macro is used for command line output (more on macros/functions later)

## Variables ([3.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-00-common-programming-concepts.html))

Variables in Rust are declared, or _bound_, using the `let` keyword:

```rust
let x = 6;
println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
```

Variables are **immutable by default**, meaning their value _cannot be changed_ once they have been bound. This is _A Good Thing™_ because immutability means less potential for errors. Prefer to leave variables as immutable, unless you absolutely have to, in which case mutable variables can be declared `mut`:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let mut x = 5;
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
    x = 6;
    println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
}
```

We'll talk about type annotations and inference later.

## Types

### Basic Types ([3.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-02-data-types.html))

Rust has the following numeric types:

| Bit Width            | Signed  | Unsigned |
| -------------------- | ------- | -------- |
| 8                    | `i8`    | `u8`     |
| 16                   | `i16`   | `u16`    |
| 32                   | `i32`   | `u32`    |
| 64                   | `i64`   | `u64`    |
| 128                  | `i128`  | `u128`   |
| architecture-defined | `isize` | `usize`  |

(`usize/isize` are the pointer width of the architecture you're compiling for. You should use them for anything representing size/length/indices of data structures, such as arrays.)

We also have floats, `f32` and `f64` which are IEEE754 floating point types (equivalent to `float` and `double` in many languages).

Booleans are of type `bool` and are either `true` or `false`.

Characters are of type `char` and are written using single quotes:

```rust
let c = 'c';
let z = 'Z';
let heart_eyed_cat = '😻';
```

`char`s in Rust are four bytes in size, as a char is meant to represent a single Unicode scalar value, meaning it can do much more than just ASCII.

### Primitive Compound Types ([3.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-02-data-types.html))

Rust has tuples, which are used extensively. Tuples can be non-homogenous and of any length.

```rust
let tup = (1, 2);
let trip: (char, i32, f64) = ('A', -2, 100.01);
```

Tuples are accessed using dot syntax, or destructured by pattern matching (more on this later):

```rust
# let tup = (1, 2);
# let trip: (char, i32, f64) = ('A', -2, 100.01);
let one = tup.0 + tup.1 + trip.1;
let (x, y) = tup;
let (c, i, _) = trip;
```

Note the `_` binding, which is used in pattern matching to discard a value:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let _ = 1;
    print!("Can you use _? {}", _);
}
```

Arrays in Rust have a fixed length and are allocated on the stack. They are indexed using brackets `[]`, and have a type signature `[type; length]`. The length of an array is part of it's type in Rust.

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let a = [1, 2 ,3];
    let first = a[0];
    let second = a[1];

    let b: [f32; 2] = [-2.0, 4.1];

    // you can also use shorthand for creating arrays of the same element!
    let zeroes = [0; 10]; // ten zeroes!
}
```

Attempting to index out of bounds will cause a **panic**. Panics are Rust's way of throwing unrecoverable errors at runtime, similar to exceptions in other languages. More on those later.

### Type Annotations

`let` bindings can be annotated with their types using the following syntax:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let a: u16 = 4;
    let b: i32 = -1;
    let c: char = 'c';
    let d: &str = "hello!";     // More on string types shortly
    let e: (i32, f32) = (12, 12.0);
    let f: [u32; 3] = [1, 2, 3];
}
```

This is rarely necessary, as Rust can infer types most of the time. You can also annotate numeric literals with their types:

```rust
let a = 4_u16;
let b = -1_i32;
let c = 3.14_f64;
```

### Composite Data Types

We can use these basic types to build more complex types. Rust has two ways of doing this.

#### Structures ([5](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch05-00-structs.html))

Those of you familiar with C will be familiar with `struct`s. Structs are types made up of several fields, where each field has a name and type.

- Structs can be created by giving values to the types, using the syntax shown.
- Fields can be accessed or updated using dot notation.
- If a struct is bound as immutable, its fields are also immutable.

```rust, editable
struct Student {
    name: String,
    id: String,
    year: u32,
    active: bool,
}

fn main() {
    let mut you = Student {
        name: String::from("Your Name"),
        id: String::from("1234567"),
        year: 2,
        active: false,
    };
    println!("My student ID is: {}", you.id);
    you.year += 1;
    println!("My year of study is: {}", you.year);
}
```

#### Enums ([6.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch06-01-defining-an-enum.html))

Enums restrict variables to a predefined finite set of named discrete values. It's short for enumeration, because it is enumerates of all the allowed options. Many languages have support for enums (e.g. C, Java, Haskell), but Rust's enums are most similar to Java's enums or sum types in functional languages such has Haskell and F#.

Say we want to represent some colours. We have a Thing, and we need it to be either red, green, or blue:

```rust, editable
enum Colour {
    Red,
    Green,
    Blue,
}

fn main() {
    let thing_colour: Colour = Colour::Red;
}
```

We now have a new type, `Colour`, and three new values: `Colour::Red`, `Colour::Blue`, and `Colour::Green`.

What makes enums really special is that variants can contain values:

```rust
enum MyEnum {
    NoValue,
    ANumber(u32),
    TwoNumbers(u32, i64),
    AString(String),
}
```

This is a really powerful feature, especially when used in combination with pattern matching, and part of what makes Rust's type system so good.

An example, using an enum to represent some shapes:

```rust, editable
enum Shape {
    Circle(u64),
    Rectangle(u64, u64),
    Triangle(u64, u64, u64),
}

fn main() {
    let circle = Shape::Circle(6);
    let triangle = Shape::Triangle(1, 2, 3);
}
```

Or a recursive definition of a binary tree[^treenote]:

```rust
enum Tree {
    Leaf(i32),
    Branch(Box<Tree>, Box<Tree>),
}
```

#### `Option<T>`

A commonly used enum is `Option<T>`. Option is used to represent values that may or may not exist. Rust has no notion of `null` (no more `NullPointerException`s!), instead preferring to wrap other types in an `Option` when some similar notion of null is needed. This has advantages, as it forces you to explicitly deal with error cases, among other things.

`T` is a generic type parameter, which we'll cover in more detail later.

```rust
enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None,
}
```

Think of it as a type-safe container which may or may not be empty. This enum is frequently used as a return type in methods that may fail:

```rust, editable
fn div(x: i64, y: i64) -> Option<i64> {
    if y == 0 {
        None
    } else {
        Some(x/y)
    }
}

fn main() {
    println!("{:?}", div(15, 3));
}
```

This particular enum is very important as it's used widely throughout the language, and we'll get to it in more detail later.

[^treenote]: The actual use of the tree here is more complex, `Box`es are smart pointers with heap allocation (for unknown size data). More in the [Raytracer Project](raytracer.md#task-54), so don't worry about these for now.


## Functions ([3.3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-03-how-functions-work.html))

Functions in Rust are declared using the `fn` keyword.

- The list of parameters is declared between the parentheses: `name: type`
- The return type is given using an arrow `-> type`
  - Functions with no return type implicitly return `()`, [the unit type](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.unit.html).

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    println!("this function has no parameters and no return type");
}

fn inc(x: i32) -> i32 {
    println!("this function returns its parameter plus one");
    return x+1;
}

fn mul(a: f64, b: f64) -> f64 {
    println!("this function returns the product of its parameters");
    a*b
}

fn zip(fst: i32, snd: i32) -> (i32, i32) {
    (fst, snd)
}
```

Note how in the last examples the `return` keyword was not used and there is no semicolon. This is because in Rust, (almost) everything is an expression that returns a value, even blocks. The value of the last expression in a block is the return value of the block. Ending an expression with a semicolon discards the return value. This can be a tricky concept to grasp, see [Rust by Example](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/expression.html) for more detail.

## Control Flow ([3.5](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch03-05-control-flow.html))

### `if` Expressions

You all hopefully know how these work. The syntax is shown below. In Rust, you don't need parentheses around the condition.

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let number = 6;

    if number % 4 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 4");
    } else if number % 3 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 3");
    } else if number % 2 == 0 {
        println!("number is divisible by 2");
    } else {
        println!("number is not divisible by 4, 3, or 2");
    }
}
```

Boolean expressions are combined with

- `&&` and
- `||` or
- `!` not
- `&&` and `||` are [lazily evaluated](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html#lazy-boolean-operators)

`if` expressions return a value too, so it can be used as a ternary conditional operator:

```rust
let condition = true;
let x = if condition { 5 } else { 6 };
```

### `loop` Loops

`loop` expressions repeat ad infinitum.

```rust, noplayground
loop {
    println!("again!");
}
```

You can `break` out of one, if needs be. This is preferred to `while true`. You can also use one to construct a do-while:

```rust, noplayground
loop {
    do_thing();
    if !condition {
        break;
    }
}
```

### `while` Loops

Pretty standard stuff too:

```rust
let mut number = 3;

while number != 0 {
    println!("{}", number);

    number -= 1;
}
```

### `for` Loops

`for` loops are more like Python's, or Java's range-based for loop, than C/C++. They are used to iterate over a collection, using an _iterator_ (more on those later).

```rust
let a = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50];

for element in a {
    println!("the value is: {}", element);
}
```

If you want to loop over a numerical range, you can create a range iterator. Like Python's range, this is exclusive of the last number:

```rust
for number in 1..10 {
    println!("{}", number);
}

for number in (1..10).rev() {
    // this loop goes from 10 -> 1
    println!("{}", number);
}
```

## Strings

Strings in Rust are [not so simple](https://dev-to-uploads.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/articles/kqolzk0s0umg647d7ogg.jpeg). For now, we will consider only `String`. `String` represents a mutable, variable length buffer which can hold your `char`s. Create an empty one with `String::new()`, or create one from a literal using [`String::from()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/string/struct.String.html#method.from-3), [`.to_owned()`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.str.html#method.to_owned) or [the trait `into`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.Into.html).

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let empty_string = String::new();
    let hello_world = String::from("Hello, World!");
    let hello_ferris: &str = "Hello, Ferris";
    let owned_ferris = hello_ferris.to_owned();
}
```

The `::` symbol is used to access associated functions which belong to a type. The `from()` and `new()` functions both belong to `String`, so we call them as shown. Think of them as static methods, for those of you into your Java.

## Pattern Matching ([6.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch06-02-match.html))

Those of you familiar with functional languages will be pleased to hear that Rust can do this. Those of you not lucky enough to be familiar with functional languages will likely be a bit confused. Think of it as a fancy switch statement for now. Here's an example, using our `Colour` enum from earlier:

```rust, editable
enum Colour {
    Red, Blue, Green, White, Black
}
fn colour_to_rgb(colour: Colour) -> (u8, u8, u8) {
    match colour {
        Colour::Red => (255, 0, 0),
        Colour::Green => (0, 255, 0),
        Colour::Blue => (0, 0, 255),
        Colour::White => (255, 255, 255),
        Colour::Black => (0, 0, 0),
    }
}

fn main() {
    colour_to_rgb(Colour::Blue);
}
```

The cases come before the `=>`, and the return value for that **match arm** comes after it. The match returns one of those tuples, and then the function returns the return value of the `match`. Remember that we don't need a `return`

However, matching is much more powerful than this. We can include arbitrary expressions after the match arm:

```rust, editable
# enum Colour {
#     Red, Blue, Green, White, Black
# }
fn colour_to_rgb(colour: Colour) -> (u8, u8, u8) {
    match colour {
        Colour::Red => (255, 0, 0),
        Colour::Green => (0, 255, 0),
        Colour::Blue => {
            println!("I'm blue, da ba dee da ba di");
            (0, 0, 255)
        },
        Colour::White => if 10 % 2 == 0 {
            (255, 255, 255)
        } else {
            unreachable!("Something is very wrong");
        },
        Colour::Black => (0, 0, 0),
    }
}

fn main() {
    let rgb = colour_to_rgb(Colour::Blue);
    println!("{:?}", rgb);
}
```

We can also use it to destructure (unpack) and bind values, for use in the `match` body. For example, with `Option<T>`:

```rust, editable
fn maybe_increment(x: Option<i64>) -> Option<i64> {
    match x {
        None => None,
        Some(i) => Some(i + 1),
    }
}
fn main() {
    let five = Some(5);
    let six = maybe_increment(five);
    let none = maybe_increment(None);
}
```

Note that matches must be exhaustive. For example, if you're matching on a `u8`, you must cover all cases from 0 to 255. This is impractical, so the placeholder `_` can be used, as a default case:

```rust, editable
fn main() {
    let val: u8 = 40;
    match val {
        12 => println!("val is 12"),
        21 => println!("val is 21"),
        _ => println!("val is some other number that we don't care about"),
    }
}
```

Pattern matching can also make use of further conditions (called _guards_). These require a fallback case to act as an else, even if it is only a `_`. There are other places pattern matching can be used, such as in [`if let`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/flow_control/if_let.html) and [`while let`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/flow_control/while_let.html) expressions.

```rust, editable
fn maybe_collatz(x: Option<u64>) -> Option<u64> {
    match x {
        None => None,
        Some(1) => None,
        Some(i) if i % 2 == 0 => Some(i / 2),
        Some(i) => Some(3 * i + 1)
    }
}
fn main() {
    let mut number = Some(7_u64);
    while let Some(i) = number {
        println!("{i}");
        number = maybe_collatz(number);
    }
}
```
