# Part 3 - Don't `panic`

This section will look at error handling in Rust, and also take a look at a few other things that you might have come accross already in more detail.

## Errors ([9](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch09-00-error-handling.html))

Rust's error handling mechanisms are kind of unique. It draws a lot on functional languages here too, with the `Result<T, E>` and `Option<T>` types being used to represent possible errors that can reasonably be expected to be handled. Panics are the other error mechanism in Rust, and are used for unrecoverable errors that halt execution.

### Panics ([9.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch09-01-unrecoverable-errors-with-panic.html))

When something goes very very wrong in your program, and you can't really do anything about it, you panic. Rust has the `panic!()` macro, which prints an error message, unwinds and cleans up the stack, and then exits.

```rust
fn main() {
    panic!("uh oh");
}
```

See how our error message ends up in the console? By default, no backtrace is shown when code panics, but we can set the environment variable `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` to. On your own machine, create a rust program that you know will panic, such as indexing out of bounds in an array, and run it with the environment variable set. You'll get a lot more information, especially when you're in debug mode. Printing the backtrace will help you pin down what is causing your code to panic.

### Results ([9.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch09-02-recoverable-errors-with-result.html))

A lot of errors can be handled at runtime, which is what `Result<T, E>` is for.

```rust
enum Result<T, E> {
    Ok(T),
    Err(E),
}
```

Result is generic over `T`, the type of the value returned upon success, and `E`, the type of the error value. Functions that return a `Result` expect you to handle possible error cases explicitly, whereas in other languages you may have to deal with exceptions. This makes error handling non-optional, meaning you're forced to write more robust code by design.

```rust
use std::{fs, io};
let f: Result<fs::File, io::Error> = fs::File::open("foo.txt");
println!("{f:?}"); //print the result
```

We can see in the above snippet that trying to open a non-existent file returns a result with either the file handle, or an I/O error. Since the code here is run on the Rust playground servers where `foo.txt` does not exist, the `Err(io::Error)` variant of the enum is printed, containing some information about the error.

If `foo.txt` did exist, we'd get an `Ok()` variant looking something like:

```
Ok(File { fd: 3, path: "/Users/Joey/code/rs118/foo.txt", read: true, write: false })
```

Remember that `f` would still be `Ok(File)`, and we'd need to `unwrap` or otherwise extract the value from the enum variant before we can use it. There's a few different ways to handle `Result`s. Pattern matching with `match` or `if let` is a good option, as then we can destructure the type to get the values we want out of it, and deal with the error however we want.

```rust
use std::{fs, io};
let f: Result<fs::File, io::Error> = fs::File::open("foo.txt");
match f {
    Ok(file) => println("File opened successfully!"),
    Err(_) => println("Could not open file, continuing..."),
}
```

We could also use `unwrap`, which panics if the `Result` is an `Err(E)`, and returns `T` if not. `expect` is the same, except we can specify an error message

```rust
use std::{fs, io};
let f: Result<fs::File, io::Error> = fs::File::open("foo.txt");

let file = f.expect("Could not open file");
```

We could also propagate the error back up to the caller. In functions that return a `Result<T, E>` or `Option<T>`, we can use the `?` operator to bubble the error back up, where the return type is compatible.

```rust
use std::{fs, io};
fn open_my_file() -> Result<String, io::Error>  {
    let contents: String = fs::read_to_string("foo.txt")?;
    Ok(contents)
}
```

Note that this only work if all the functions you use `?` on have the same return type as your function. Alternatively, you can return `Result<T, Box<dyn Err>>`, which allows you to return any error type that implements the the [`Error` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html).

```rust
use std::{error::Error, fs};

fn do_fallible_things() -> Result<(), Box<dyn Error>> {
    let v = vec![45, 73, 12, 91];
    let sixth = v.get(6)?;
    let contents: String = fs::read_to_string("foo.txt")?;
    Ok(())
}
```

### Best Practices ([9.3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch09-03-to-panic-or-not-to-panic.html))

Getting used to writing idiomatic error handling code in Rust can take a bit of practice. The general idea is to use the type system to your advantage where possible, and panic only where absolutely necessary.

`unwrap` and `expect` are handy when prototyping, before you decide on how you want to handle errors within your code. `unwrap` is also useful in cases where you have more information than the compiler, such as there being an invariant in your code that means the conditions for an error can never occur. `panic` should generally be used in cases where your code is in a bad state, and execution cannot continue under any circumstances

Results should be used where failure is an expected possibility, and the caller can be reasonably expected to handle them. It is often useful to create custom types that can be returned within `Result::Err(E)`, to describe the kinds of errors that may occur within your program. Encoding information within the type system makes your code more expressive and robust.

```rust
enum MyError {
    FileOpenError,
    FileTooLarge,
    FileParseError,
    NumberTooSmallError,
}

fn do_stuff() -> Result<u64, MyError> {
    let contents = std::fs::read_to_string("data.txt").map_err(|_| MyError::FileOpenError)?;

    if contents.len() > 10 {
        return Err(MyError::FileTooLarge);
    }

    let num: u64 = contents.parse().map_err(|_| MyError::FileParseError)?;
    num.checked_sub(100).ok_or(MyError::NumberTooSmallError)
}
```

Note how I'm making use of some of the methods of `Result` which make working with errors a lot nicer.

I want to shout out two crates here too that make error handling much nicer. [`Anyhow`](https://github.com/dtolnay/anyhow) provides a more ergonomic and flexible type for error handling. [`thiserror`](https://github.com/dtolnay/thiserror) provides a `#[derive]` macro for the `std::error::Error` trait, allowing you to create custom error types much more easily. Have a look at some examples of using the two to see how to structure code that works with errors nicely.

## Generics ([10.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-01-syntax.html))

Generics allow for [parametric polymorphism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parametric_polymorphism) in Rust, letting us write type signatures that are generic over type variables. Generics can be used in struct/enum definitions:

```rust
struct Point<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

enum Option<T> {
    Some(T),
    None
}
```

And in function/method definitions:

```rust
fn id<T>(ty: T) -> T {
    ty
}

impl<T> Point<T> {
    fn new(x: T, y: T) -> Self {
        Self {x, y}
    }
}
```

Generics are [monomorphised](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Monomorphization), meaning that at compile time every time your generic type/function is used it a new copy of it is created with the type variables replaced by concrete types.

Generics are most powerful when used in combination with trait bounds, which leads me very nicely into...

## Traits ([10.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-02-traits.html))

Traits define shared behaviour, and tell the compiler about what functionality a particular type has and shares with other types. They're very similar to interfaces/abstract classes in object-oriented languages, and very very similar to typeclasses in Haskell. Traits are defined as shown, with the function bodies omitted.

```rust
pub trait Summary {
    fn summarise(&self) -> String;
}
```

Other types can then implement traits as shown.

It is often useful to provide default implementations for methods of a trait, that then types can choose to override if they wish, or use the default behaviour.

Traits are used to specify bounds on generics and

Traits and generics form the backbone of the type system, and theres an awful lot you can do with them. A few examples, in descending order of "how ~~cursed~~ fancy is this:"

- Conditionally implementing methods by bounding `impl` blocks
- Associated types
- Trait objects & object safety
- `std::marker::PhantomData`
- Const generics
- `Deref` coercion
- Function traits (`Fn` vs `fn`)
- The `Sized` trait
- Interior mutability
- GATs

## References & Lifetimes ([10.3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch10-03-lifetime-syntax.html))

One of Rust's selling points is that it ensures, at compile time, that all references/borrows are always valid. The compiler does this using lifetimes, which is the scope for which a reference is valid. Most of the time the compiler can do this for us, but sometimes we have to step in and help it out.

This is very unique to Rust and will feel weird to start with, but it'll really cement the ideas about borrow checking and ownership.

Recall how the borrow checker works: it makes sure that all of our references are valid, and prevents us from using references after the values have been dropped. Every reference in Rust has a lifetime. Below, `r` has a lifetime of `'a` and `x` has a lifetime of `'b`.

```rust
{
    let r;                // ---------+-- 'a
                          //          |
    {                     //          |
        let x = 5;        // -+-- 'b  |
        r = &x;           //  |       |
    }                     // -+       |
                          //          |
    println!("r: {}", r); //          |
}                         // ---------+
```

Have a look at that compile error. We can see that `r` borrows `x`, but `x` is dropped while it's still borrowed, which is not allowed.

Let's look at an example: a function that takes two strings and returns the longest one:

```rust
fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

Rust isn't quite sure how to infer lifetimes here, so we need to help it out by adding generic lifetimes parameters. Just take a minute to appreciate that compiler error too, which tells us to do exactly what I'm about to explain now.

Lifetime annotations in function signatures tell the compiler which input references the output reference comes from, describing how input and output lifetimes relate to each other. We introduce lifetime names with the same syntax as generics, and then can use the annotations on references to tell the compiler what the lifetime of the reference is.

```rust
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```

The output reference has the same lifetime as the two input references, `'a`. The annotations go in the function signature, and become part of the contract of the function much like types are. Anyone calling the function must uphold the contract, meaning the two input references must have the same lifetime. When we compile the function, the generic lifetime `'a` will be replaces with the concrete lifetime that is equal to the smaller of the timetimes of `x` and `y`, and the returned reference will be valid for the same lifetime. Take a look at the following error:

```rust
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("long string is long");
    let result;
    {
        let string2 = String::from("xyz");
        result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2.as_str());
    }
    println!("The longest string is {}", result);
}
```

Because `string2` is dropped while `result` is still alive, the lifetimes are not the same and so the compiler errors. This makes sense though, because if `result` was a reference to `string2`, then it'd be dangling.

When retuning a reference from a function, the lifetime of the return type needs to match the lifetime parameter for one of the parameters. If it doesn't then you're probably trying to do something bad, such as return a dangling reference.

```rust
fn longest<'a>(x: &str, y: &str) -> &'a str {
    let result = String::from("really long string");
    result.as_str()
}
```

Have a look at the error. Even though we annotated the lifetime, we're trying to return a reference to data that will be dropped when the function returns.

### Lifetimes in Structs

What if you wanted to create a struct that contained a reference? The tuple struct below contains a reference to the first word in a string.

```rust
struct Word<'a>(&'a str);

impl<'a> Word<'a> {
    pub fn new(input: &'a str) -> Self {
        let first_word = input.split_ascii_whitespace().next().unwrap();
        Self(first_word)
    }
}
```

We have to annotate the lifetimes of the references, otherwise the compiler has no idea where the references come from. The lifetime of that struct is now tied to the lifetime of the string that was used to instantiate create it, and so the struct cannot outlive the argument to `Word::new()`. The example below won't compile, take a look at the error message.

```rust
# struct Word<'a>(&'a str);
#
# impl<'a> Word<'a> {
#     pub fn new(input: &'a str) -> Self {
#         let first_word = input.split_ascii_whitespace().next().unwrap();
#         Self(first_word)
#     }
# }
let fst: Word;
{
    let sentence = "Oh boy, I sure do love lifetimes!".to_owned();
    fst = Word::new(&sentence);
}
println!("First word is: {}", fst.0);
```

Lifetimes are hard so don't worry if you don't get it all straight away. The best way to get the hang of them, as with anything, is to use them, so try writing some code that needs lifetime annotations, or adding annotations to existing code.

## Closures ([13.1](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch13-01-closures.html))

Closures are anonymous functions, similar to lambdas in other languages. What makes closures special in rust is that they _close oevr_ their environment, allowing you to reference other variables from the scope in which their defined. The arguments to a closure go within pipes: `|args|`. The expression following the pipes is the body of the function. You don't need to specify types as they're inferred, but you can if you like.

```rust
let increment = |x: u32| -> u32 { x+1 };
let also_increment = |x| x+1;
let four: i32 = also_increment(3);
```

The example above just shows a basic anonymous function. Consider the one below.

```rust
let pi: f64 = 3.14;
let area = |r| pi * r * r;

let radii = [1.0, 2.5, 4.1];
let areas = radii.map(area);
println!("{areas:?}");
```

The closure is referencing a variable from local scope (`pi`) within it's function body, and we can still do all the things with it that we usually can with anonymous functions. We then pass the closure to `map`, which maps an array of circle radii to their areas by applying the closure to each element. Closures can be passed around to/from functions, bound to variables, stored in structs, etc, like any other value.

The types of closures are complicated, but they can be thought of as structs which contain a function pointer, and references to all of the variables they capture. They implement one of three traits, depending on how they capture values:

- [`Fn`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.Fn.html), for when the closure does not mutate the state of the capture variables
- [`FnMut`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.FnMut.html), for when the closure mutates any captured values
- [`FnOnce`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/ops/trait.FnOnce.html), for closures that that consume capture values

The map function shown above takes an `FnMut`, as it has to be called more than once, but can mutate captured values if it wants. As it mutates its environment, it means give closures state:

```rust
let mut idx = 0;
let zeros = [0; 5];
println!("{:?}", zeros.map(|_| {idx +=1; idx}));
```

The [Rust By Example section on closures](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/fn/closures/capture.html) gives some good examples of closure capturing.

## Iterators ([13.2](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch13-02-iterators.html))

Iterators are used to process sequences of items. When usually you'd have to use loops to process sequences of data, iterators allow common patterns such as maps, filters and folds to be expressed much nicer. For the Haskell enthusiasts out there, Rust's iterators are the same as Haskell lists. Iterators can be created from slices, vectors, arrays, and [any other type that implements the `IntoIterator` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.IntoIterator.html#implementors).

```rust
let v1 = vec![1, 2, 3];

let v1_iter = v1.iter();

for val in v1_iter {
    println!("Got: {}", val);
}
```

For loops in Rust work using iterators, and loop over them. Iterators work using the method `fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Item>`, where `Item` is the type that the iterator returns. `next()` will return the next item in the stream each time it is called, until it reaches the end of the iterator, when `None` is returned.

Iterators have a number of methods, generally grouped into _consumers_ and _adaptors_. Consumers process the iterator and return a value, and adaptors convert the iterator into another iterator. Iterators in Rust are lazy, so no computation is done until they are consumed.

```rust
let v1 = vec![4, 7, 12, -9, 18, 1];

//consumers
let total: i64 = v1.iter().sum();
let min = v1.iter().min();
let max = v1.iter().max();
let product = v1.iter().fold(0, |acc, x| acc * x);

//producers
//these do nothing as they're never used
let evens = v1.iter().filter(|x| *x % 2 == 0);
let squares = v1.iter().map(|x| x * x);

//use the iterator in a for loop
//zip zips two iterator together
for (i, i_squared) in v1.iter().zip(squares){
    println!("{i} squared is {i_squared}");
}
```

Take a look at [the `Iterator` trait](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html) and [`std::iter`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/index.html) to see what iterators can do.

Iterators are are just as performant as the equivalent for loops (if not better), and allow to express computation much more cleanly in many cases. Choosing for loops vs chains of iterator adaptors is often personal preference so go with whichever you prefer, but always be aware of how to do it the other way so you are able to make the most informed choice. Two methods are shown below to calculate the dot product of two slices. Which do you think is better?

```rust
fn dot_1(x: &[i64], y: &[i64]) -> i64 {
    assert_eq!(x.len(), y.len());
    //simple indexing for loop
    let mut sum = 0;
    for i in 0..x.len() {
        sum += x[i] * y[i];
    }
    sum
}

fn dot_2(x: &[i64], y: &[i64]) -> i64 {
    assert_eq!(x.len(), y.len());
    x.iter().zip(y.iter()).fold(0, |sum, (xi, yi)| sum + xi * yi )
}

fn main() {
    let x = vec![4, 7, 12, -9, 18, 1];
    let y = vec![1, 0, -8, 63, 72, -11];

    let d1 = dot_1(&x, &y);
    let d2 = dot_2(&x, &y);

    println!("{d1} == {d2}");
}
```

## Further Reading

Well thanks for making is this far. Hopefully you consider yourself a confident Rustacean by now (or you at least will by the time you finish your interpreter and raytracer). If you want to learn more, the list below contains a collection of Rust things that I think are excellent.

- The chapters of the book not covered here are worth a read ([11](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch11-00-testing.html), [12](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch12-00-an-io-project.html), and [14](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch14-00-more-about-cargo.html) onwards)
- [The Rustonomicon](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/) covers lots of the finer details of Rust, especially the forbidden arts of unsafe Rust
- [The Reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/index.html) aims to be a complete reference for the language
- [Learn Rust With Entirely Too Many Linked Lists](https://rust-unofficial.github.io/too-many-lists/) talks you through building a series of linked lists in Rust, with a surprising amount of detail for something seemingly so simple
- [Rust for Rustaceans](https://nostarch.com/rust-rustaceans) covers some advanced Rust topics for, for those who've already mastered the basics.
- [The Rust Cookbook](https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/rust-cookbook/) is a collection of examples that demonstrate good practices and common tasks
- [The Embedded Rust Book](https://docs.rust-embedded.org/book/intro/index.html) is an introduction to writing Rust for bare metal embedded systems
- [Discovery](https://docs.rust-embedded.org/discovery/microbit/index.html) is an introduction to microcontroller-based embedded systems that uses Rust as the teaching language rather than the usual C/C++
- [rust-lang.org's own "Learn Rust" page](https://www.rust-lang.org/learn)
- [This Week in Rust](https://this-week-in-rust.org/) is a weekly Rust newsletter
- <https://cheats.rs/> is a handy cheatsheet
- <https://github.com/ctjhoa/rust-learning> has a bunch of resources for learning Rust
- <https://github.com/rust-unofficial/awesome-rust> is a curated list of Rust code and resources
- [r/rust](https://reddit.com/r/rust) often has interesting posts worth reading
- [The Rust community discord server](https://discord.com/invite/rust-lang-community) is cool
